Create filter-panel.mdx (#1042)
carbon-design-system/carbon-for-ibm-dotcom-website: src/pages/components/filter-panel.mdx

---
title: Filter panel
description: The filter panel is a component that can be customized to provide categorized filters to help users trim down large amounts of content, data and/or search results.
---

> import { ComponentStatus } from 'components/ComponentList';
> import ComponentDescription from 'components/ComponentDescription';
> import ComponentFeedback from 'components/ComponentFeedback';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import ComponentDescription from 'components/ComponentDescription';
import ComponentFooter from 'components/ComponentFooter';
```

Within the categories, we recommend the default ordering of items to be alphabetical unless business goals require a different ordering.

### Number of categories

#### One category
If there is only one category, consider displaying all the filters open.

*placeholder image*

#### Two to nine categories
If there are between two and nine categories of filters, consider having the top one to three categories open by default, and the other categories collapsed.

*placeholder image*

#### Ten or more categories
If there are over ten categories, consider collapsing all of the categories on initial load, or having the first category open.

*placeholder image*

### Number of filter items within a category

#### One to seven filter items
If there are between one and seven filter items within a category, expose all of the items.

*placeholder image*

#### Eight or more filter items
If there are eight or more filter items within a given category, consider utilizing the “View all” button. Expose a portion of the filter items so the user can quickly scan the options, once they select the view all button, the rest of the items are revealed. 

*placeholder image*

> <ComponentFooter name="Back to top" type="ui" />

Reviewer: Here's the problem. We forgot to change the name. lol

```suggestion
<ComponentFooter name="Filter panel" type="ui" />
```

---
title: Filter panel
description: The filter panel is a component that can be customized to provide categorized filters to help users trim down large amounts of content, data and/or search results.
---

import { ComponentStatus } from 'components/ComponentList';
import ComponentDescription from 'components/ComponentDescription';
import ComponentFeedback from 'components/ComponentFeedback';

> <ComponentDescription name="Filter panel" type="ui" />

Reviewer: Looks like you need to add `Filter panel` [over here](https://github.com/carbon-design-system/carbon-for-ibm-dotcom-website/blob/main/src/data/components.json#L3) under `ui`

*placeholder image*

#### Ten or more categories
If there are over ten categories, consider collapsing all of the categories on initial load, or having the first category open.

*placeholder image*

### Number of filter items within a category

#### One to seven filter items
If there are between one and seven filter items within a category, expose all of the items.

*placeholder image*

#### Eight or more filter items
If there are eight or more filter items within a given category, consider utilizing the “View all” button. Expose a portion of the filter items so the user can quickly scan the options, once they select the view all button, the rest of the items are revealed. 

*placeholder image*

## Design and functional specifications

For more details on Filter panel, see <a href="link to design specs" target="https://ibm.box.com/s/19a0hjn61gh3qh59kbgxba43y8uymuqy" rel="noreferrer">design specs</a> and see <a href="link to functional specs" target="https://github.com/carbon-design-system/carbon-for-ibm-dotcom-website/wiki/Filter-panel" rel="noreferrer">functional specs</a>.

 <a href="Link to the BOX folder" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer">here</a>.

> ## Development documentation
> 
> <ComponentStatus name="Filter panel" type="ui" />
> 
> ## Feedback
> 
> <ComponentFeedback />

Reviewer: It looks like you began working on this before we updated each component with its footer.

```suggestion
<ComponentFooter name="Back to top" type="ui" />
```

---
title: Filter panel

> description: The filter panel is a component that can be customized to provide categorized filters to help users trim down large amounts of content, data and/or search results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: The filter panel is a component that can be customized to provide categorized filters to help users trim down large amounts of content, data, and/or search results.
```

Reviewer 2: Adding a comma before the conjunction here to comply with IBM Style, which follows the Chicago Manual of Style serial comma rule. 🐕‍🦺

---

import ComponentDescription from 'components/ComponentDescription';
import ComponentFooter from 'components/ComponentFooter';

<ComponentDescription name="Filter panel" type="ui" />

<AnchorLinks>

<AnchorLink>Default</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Anatomy</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Selection methods</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Behaviors</AnchorLink>

> <AnchorLink>Category guidance</AnchorLink>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<AnchorLink>Default displays</AnchorLink>
```

Author: Change to Recommendations

<AnchorLink>Design and functional specifications</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Development documentation</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Feedback</AnchorLink>

</AnchorLinks>

## Default

> Filter panel includes a heading, configurable filters and an optional children heading area. Filter panel supports multiple categories and selection methods, it is typically placed on the left side of the page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filter panel includes a heading, configurable filters, and an optional children heading area. Filter panel supports multiple categories and selection methods, and it is typically placed on the left side of the page.
```

<Row>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={6}>

![A visual example of the Filter panel component](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-default.jpg)

> 

Reviewer 2: A caption (and also for the other images, except for anatomy) would be great. It's a partial sentence here so no need for a period at the end.

> Example of the filter panel component

</Column>

</Row>

### Use case

![A visual example of the Filter panel component in context of a page](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-usecase.jpg)
  

## Anatomy

<Row>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={6}>

![A visual example of the anatomy of the Filter panel component](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-anatomy.jpg)

</Column>

</Row>

<br />

  

> 1. **Children:** Optional container that allows components like tag group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Child/children (optional):** Container that allows for components such as tag group.
```

> 2. **Header:** Customizeable header for the filter panel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Header:** Customizable header for the filter panel.
```

> 3. **Category:** Customizable category header for a group of filters (required).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Category (required):** Customizable category header for a group of filters.
```

Reviewer 2: @oliviaflory, I'm making these consistent with core Carbon.

> 4. **Filter item:** Customizable filter item, it can be a single or multi select (required).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Filter item (required):** Customizable filter item, it can be a single or multi select.
```

> 5. **Clear button:** Customizable button that deselects all selected filter items within the filter panel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. **Clear button:** Customizable button that deselects all selected filter items.
```

## Selection methods

> Choosing the right filter selection method will improve usability and user efficiency. Filter panel supports several selection methods that are appropriate for different situations. Consider the data your users are looking at, what they are trying to achieve, and how they might intuitively narrow down the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Choosing the correct filter selection method will improve usability and user efficiency. Filter panel supports several selection methods that are appropriate for different situations. Consider the data your users are looking at, what they are trying to achieve, and how they might intuitively narrow down the data.
```

### Single selection
Use a single-selection filter when the user can pick only one attribute to modify data results. Under the hood, single selection behaves like a radio button.

<Row>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>

![Example image: single selection with no selected filter.](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-single-selection-example-not-selected.jpg)

> <Caption>Example of single selection with no filter item selected.</Caption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Caption>Example of single selection with no filter item selected</Caption>
```

</Column>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>

![Example image: single selection with selected filter.](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-single-selection-example-selected.jpg)

> <Caption>Example of single selection with a filter item selected.</Caption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Caption>Example of single selection with a filter item selected</Caption>
```

</Column>

</Row>

> Single-selection supports multiple tiers of content. Second tier content is exposed after the user selects the parent filter, tiered content is indented below the parent filter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Single selection supports multiple tiers of content. Second tier content is exposed after the user selects the parent filter, and the tiered content is indented below the parent filter.
```

<Row>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>

![Example image: single selection hover state of a parent tier filter item.](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-single-selection-parent-tier.jpg)

> <Caption>Example of single selection hover state of a parent tier filter item.</Caption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Caption>Example of single selection hover state of a parent tier filter item</Caption>
```

</Column>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>

![Example image: parent tier filter item selected, with child tier items exposed.](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-single-selection-child-tier.jpg)

> <Caption>Example of parent tier filter item selected, with child tier items exposed.</Caption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Caption>Example of parent tier filter item selected, with child tier items exposed</Caption>
```

</Column>

</Row>

### Multiselect

> Use a multiselect filter when the user has the option to pick more than one attribute to modify the data results. Under the hood, multiselects behave like checkboxes.

Reviewer 3: Just want to double-check...Under the hood, `multiselects` behave like checkboxes. Should this be `multiselect` behaves like checkboxes?

Reviewer 2: This is good as is, @JennySanchez.

<Row>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>

![Example image: multiselect with no selected filter item.](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-multiselect-not-selected.jpg)

> <Caption>Example of multiselect with no selected filter item.</Caption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Caption>Example of multiselect with no selected filter item</Caption>
```

</Column>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>

![Example image: multiselect with multiple filter items selected.](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-multiselect-selected.jpg)

> <Caption>Example of multiselect with multiple filter items selected.</Caption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Caption>Example of multiselect with multiple filter items selected</Caption>
```

</Column>

</Row>

### Multiple categories

> A category is a set of filter items within the same topic. For example, “size” is a category and small, medium, large, and extra large are its filter choices. Multiple filter categories may be applied to the same data set. For example, the user can filter by size, color, and price range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A category is a set of filter items within the same topic. For example, “size” is a category and small, medium, large, and extra large are its filter choices. Selections from multiple categories may be applied to the same data set. For example, the user can filter by size, color, and price range.
```

![A visual example of the Filter panel component with multiple categories in context of a page](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-multiple-categories.jpg)

> 

Reviewer 2: Possible caption to use here:

> Example of results being filtered by selections from within two categories

## Behaviors

> ### Larger breakpoints (max, xl, lg)

Reviewer 2: Is there a custom for which way to show sizes? In the previous section, one of the sentences had sizes ascending upwards and this feels right and more comfortable than going the other way. So maybe matching this here?

> ### Larger breakpoints (max, xl, lg)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Larger breakpoints (lg, xl, max)
```

The filter panel spans 4 columns of the 16 column grid with a customizable height. It can be configured with any number of filters and categories. 

* The user may expand multiple filter categories at a time.
* The user may collapse all categories.
* The user can collapse categories that have filters selected. 

### Scroll
Filter panel scrolls with the page. Depending on the amount of filters available to the user, the filter panel could exceed the browser height.

### Keyboard interaction
Filter panel includes a Skip to main content option for keyboard users so they can jump into the main content and/or search results.

> ### Smaller breakpoints (md and sm)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Smaller breakpoints (sm and md)
```

On smaller breakpoints, the filter panel is triggered by a button that can be configured anywhere within the experience. Once the user selects the filter button, a modal will open and display the filter panel, the user can close the modal to view the filtered results. The filter button should indicate how many filters the user has selected.

![A visual example of the Filter panel component at a smaller breakpoint](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-behaviors-smaller-breakpoints.jpg)

> <Caption>Example of the Filter panel in smaller breakpoints, the user selects the filter button, selects a number of filter items, and closes the modal to view the results.</Caption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Caption>Example of the filter panel in smaller breakpoints. The user selects the filter button, selects a number of filter items, and closes the modal to view the results.</Caption>
```

> ## Category guidance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Default displays
```

Author: Jan and I agreed to change this to `Display recommendations`

When determining the default display for your user, consider the information you have in your filter, including:

* The ordering of categories
* The number of categories
* The number of items within each category

> Then decide which categories are open by default and which categories are closed. Try to strike a balance between what the user may need and the cognitive load of seeing all options at once.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Decide which categories should be open by default and which categories can be closed. Try to strike a balance between what the user may need and the cognitive load of seeing too many options at once.
```

> ### Ordering of categories and items

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Ordering of categories
```

The ordering of top level categories is usually determined by relevance to user goals.

Within the categories, we recommend the default ordering of items to be alphabetical unless business goals require a different ordering.

> ### Number of categories

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Open or closed?
```

<Caption>Example of Filter panel with one filter category, open by default.</Caption>

</Column>

</Row>

#### Two to nine categories
If there are between two and nine categories of filters, consider having the top one to three categories open by default, and the other categories collapsed.

<Row>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={6}>

![A visual example of the Filter panel component with seven filter categories](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-number-of-categories-two-to-nine.jpg)

<Caption>Example of Filter panel with seven filter categories, the first two categories open by default, the other five categories collapsed.</Caption>

</Column>

</Row>

#### Ten or more categories
If there are over ten categories, consider collapsing all of the categories on initial load, or having the first category open.

<Row>

<Column colMd={4} colLg={6}>

![A visual example of the Filter panel component with ten filter categories](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-number-of-categories-ten.jpg)

<Caption>Example of Filter panel with ten filter categories, the first category open by default, the other nine categories collapsed.</Caption>

</Column>

</Row> 

> ### Number of filter items within a category

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Number of items per category
```

* The user may expand multiple filter categories at a time.
* The user may collapse all categories.
* The user can collapse categories that have filters selected. 

### Larger breakpoints (lg, xl, max)
The filter panel spans 4 columns of the 16 column grid with a customizable height. 

#### Scroll
Filter panel scrolls with the page. Depending on the amount of filters available to the user, the filter panel could exceed the browser height.

#### Keyboard interaction
Filter panel includes a Skip to main content option for keyboard users so they can jump into the main content and/or search results.

### Smaller breakpoints (sm and md)
On smaller breakpoints, the filter panel is triggered by a button that can be configured anywhere within the experience. Once the user selects the filter button, a modal will open and display the filter panel, the user can close the modal to view the filtered results. The filter button should indicate how many filters the user has selected.

![A visual example of the Filter panel component at a smaller breakpoint](../../images/component/filter-panel/filter-panel-behaviors-smaller-breakpoints.jpg)

> <Caption>Example of the filter panel in smaller breakpoints. The user selects the filter button, selects a number of filter items, and closes the modal to view the results.</Caption>

Reviewer 4: I think it might be good to mention something like "From left to right, the mobile screens above shows these states: no filter applied, filter panel open, and filters active." Key word "left to right". Shouldn't assume people from all cultures will have the same sense of progression.

Author: @shixiedesign Thanks for the feedback, makes absolute sense! I updated the caption but didn't say "mobile" because we don't usually reference small and medium as mobile and the section is called "smaller breakpoints". 

LMK what you think!
